<div style="text-align: justify">
    
# Detection Script
This repository provides an updated combined version of the [Barcode Detection Script and the Peptide Detection Extraction Script](https://github.com/grimmlabs/AAV_GrimmLab_JoVE2022) that can be used to identify either barcode sequences or peptide insertions by flanking constant regions in sequencing data generated by Illumina platforms. For each sample, several output files will be created, which can be further analysed using the Barcode & Peptide Analysis Script. This README will give you a detailed instruction on how to use the updated script, i.e., how your input files should look like, what arguments you need to specifiy, and what kind of output files will be generated. Especially if you do not feel so comfortable with running scripts, please read this instruction carefully!  

&emsp;

## Table of Contents
A. [Detection Script](#detection-script)
1. [Requirements](#requirements)
2. [Prepare your Input Files](#prepare-your-input-files)
    - [For Barcode Detection](#for-barcode-detection)
    - [For Peptide Detection](#for-peptide-detection)
3. [Running the Script](#running-the-script)
    - [Example for Barcode Detection](#example-for-barcode-detection)
    - [Example for Peptide Detection](#example-for-peptide-detection)
4. [The Output Files](#the-output-files)
    - [For Barcode Detection](#for-barcode-detection-1)
    - [For Peptide Detection](#for-peptide-detection-1)

B. [Analysis Script](#analysis-script)
1. [Prepare your Input Files](#prepare-your-input-files)
    - [For Barcode Analysis](#for-barcode-analysis)
    - [For Peptide Analysis](#for-peptide-analysis)
2. [Running the Script](#running-the-script)
    - [Example for Barcode Analysis](#example-for-barcode-analysis)
    - [Example for Peptide Analysis](#example-for-peptide-analysis)
3. [The Output Files](#the-output-files)
    - [For Barcode Analysis](#for-barcode-analysis-1)
    - [For Peptide Analysis](#for-peptide-analysis-1) 

&emsp;

## Requirements
To run this script, you have to have Python 3 (version used to test this script: 3.12.3) installed on your computer. Additionally, the following modules should be installed (the script was tested with the indicated versions):
- Biopython (1.83)
- Numpy (1.26.4)
- Pandas (2.2.2)
- Matplotlib (3.8.4)
- Seaborn (0.13.2)

**Note:** Especially for the pandas module, it is important that you use the indicated version! The script might not work with older or newer versions of pandas.
  
&emsp;

## Prepare your Input Files
### _For Barcode Detection_
If you want to use the script to detect barcode sequences, you will need the following input files:
- **A folder containing your sequencing data (gz files).** It would be best if you already rename the files and give them a distinct name, e.g. _Sample1.txt.gz_, _Sample2.txt.gz_ or _M1_heart_cDNA.txt.gz_, _M2_liver_gDNA.txt.gz_ etc.
- **A tab-delimited text file "Variants.txt"** that includes your barcode sequences and the respective variants, e.g:

    > AGACTCGTTGTATAT&emsp;&emsp;&emsp;&emsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;AAV1  
    TGGGCGGTCAGGGTC&emsp;&emsp;&emsp;&emsp;AAV2  
    TTGCCGTCCTTCGAG&emsp;&emsp;&emsp;&emsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;AAV3  
    TTCAGCGGACGGGCC&emsp;&emsp;&emsp;&emsp;AAV4

- If you want to check your sequencing data for possible contaminations (i.e., other barcode sequnces that are used frequently in your lab), then you should also prepare **a tab-delimited text file "Contaminations.txt"** that includes the barcode sequences used in your lab and the respective variants, e.g.:

    > AGACTCGTTGTATAT&emsp;&emsp;&emsp;&emsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;A2  
    TAGAGATTTAAACCG&emsp;&emsp;&emsp;&emsp;&nbsp;A3  
    CGTGACAGCGGATGG&emsp;&emsp;&emsp;&emsp;A4  
    TGGGCGGTCAGGGTC&emsp;&emsp;&emsp;&emsp;A5

 &emsp;

### _For Peptide Detection_
If you want to use the script to detect peptide insertions, you will only need the following input:
- **A folder containing your sequencing data (gz files).** It would be best if you already rename the files and give them a distinct name, e.g. _Sample1.txt.gz_, _Sample2.txt.gz_ or _M1_heart_cDNA.txt.gz_, _M2_liver_gDNA.txt.gz_ etc.

 &emsp;

## Running the Script

If you are running the script for the first time, open the Windows Terminal and call the script with 
```
python Script_BarcodePeptideDetection.py -h
````

This will give you a list of the arguments that you need to specifiy to run the script successfully:  

 &emsp;

**<p style="font-size:15px;">Required arguments:</p>**
- **-a MODE:**  
Specify in which mode you want to run the script. If you want to use it for detection of barcodes, type "BC", if you want to use it for detection of peptide insertions, type "PV".

- **-d DIRECTORY:**  
Give the path to the directory where your sequencing data (gz files) are located.

- **-o OUTPUTDIR:**  
Give the path to the directory where the output files should be saved.

- **-l BCVLEFT:**  
Give the short flanking oligo sequence at 5' of the barcode/peptide location.  

- **-r BCVRIGHT:**  
Give the short flanking oligo sequence at 3' of the barcode/peptide location. 

&emsp;

**<p style="font-size:15px;">Optional arguments:</p>**

- **-n BCVLOC:**  
Give the position of the first expected barcode/peptide nucleotide if the read numbering starts with 0.
- **-m BCVMARGIN:**  
Give the number of nucleotides before and after BCV_loc to search for the barcode/peptide.

- **-k BCVLOCREVCOMP:**  
Give the position of the first expected barcode/peptide nucleotide on the reverse complement strand if the read numbering starts with 0.

- **-p PLOTS:**  
Set this flag if you want to generate plots showing the quality of your sequencing run which will be saved in a seperate pdf file for each sample. **Note:** The plots will only include a subsample of the data (100,000 reads).  

- **-w SILENCE:**  
Set this flag if you want to avoid printouts in the terminal.  

- **-z VERSION:**  
Set this flag if you want to show the script's version number and exit.

&emsp;

**<p style="font-size:15px;">Additional arguments for barcode detection:</p>**

- **-v VARIANTS:**  
Give the path to the tab-delimited text file that includes unique barcode sequences assigned to one of the cap variants. This argument is required for barcode detection. 

- **-c CONTAMINATIONS:**  
If you want to check your sequencing data for contaminations, give the path to the tab-delimited text file that includes unique barcode sequences assigned to contaminating cap variants.  

&emsp;

**<p style="font-size:15px;">Additional arguments for peptide detection:</p>**

- **-s BCVSIZE:**  
Give the length of the peptide sequence. This argument is required for peptide detection.  

&emsp;

By default, the script searches for the barcode or peptide sequence over the complete length of the read. If you want to restrict the search to a specific margin, you need to specifiy the arguments BCVLOC, BCVMARGIN, and BCVLOCREVCOMP.

&emsp;

### _Example for Barcode Detection_
Here is an example on how to run the script for barcode detection:
```
python Script_BarcodePeptideDetection.py -a BC -v ./Input/Variants.txt -c ./Input/Contaminations.txt -d ./Input/ -o ./Output/ -l ATGCTC -r CAGGGT -n 45 -m 5 -k 58 -p
```
In this example, the barcode will be searched for within the specified search-window. Moreover, the sequencing data will be checked for contaminations and a pdf file with plots showing the sequencing quality will be generated.

 &emsp;

### _Example for Peptide Detection_
Here is an example on how to run the script for peptide detection:
```
python Script_BarcodePeptideDetection.py -a PV -d ./Input/ -o ./Output/ -l TCCAGGGCCAG -r GCCCAGG -s 27 -w
 ```
In this example, the search for the peptide sequences will not be limited to a specified window. Moreover, the pdf file with the plots will not be generated and printouts in the terminal will be avoided.
  
 &emsp;

## The Output Files
### _For Barcode Detection_
Running the script in barcode detection mode will generate at least 3 different output files per gz input file.

- **Log file**:  
This text file summarizes all the important numbers: It includes the total number of reads as well as the number and proportion of recovered reads (i.e., reads in which the flanking constant regions were found), of reads with barcodes corresponding to your expected variants, of reads with barcodes corresponding to contaminating variants (if a "Contaminations.txt" file was given, otherwise this number will be 0), of reads with unknown variants, and of reads where the constant regions were not found. Additionally, you can find the mean sequence length and mean sequence quality here.

- **Variants file:**  
This CSV file can be loaded into Excel, giving you an alphabetically sorted table containing the expected variants with their barcode sequence and the frequency with which they were found in your sequencing data.

- **Unknown  Variants file**:  
This CSV file can be loaded into Excel, giving you a table containing the contaminating or unknown barcode sequences sorted by their frequency in the sequencing data. If you ran the script with a contamination file as input, the contaminating barcodes will be assigned to a variant name. Otherwise, they will all be labelled "Unknown".  

&emsp;

Optional:

- **Plots file**:  
This file will only be generated if you set the flag for the plot argument. The pdf file includes different plots that visualize the quality of your sequencing run: a box plot showing the per base sequence quality, a histogram showing the per sequence quality, a line plot showing the sequence content across all bases, and a histogram showing the sequence length distribution. One look at these plots should give you a rough overview over your sequencing quality.  

&emsp;

### _For Peptide Detection_
Running the script in peptide detection mode will generate at least 2 different output files per sample input file.

- **Log file:**  
Similarly to the barcode detection mode, a log file will be generated. This text file includes the total number of reads and of recovered reads, as well as the mean sequence length and quality.

- **PV file:**  
This CSV file can be loaded into Excel, giving you a table containing the detected peptide DNA sequences sorted by their frequency in the sequencing data.

Additionally, if you set the flag for the plot argument, a pdf file with plots showing the quality of your sequencing data, as described above for barcode detection, will be generated.

&emsp;
&emsp;

# Analysis Script
This repository provides an updated combined version of the [Barcode Analysis Script and the Peptide Extraction and Ranking Script](https://github.com/grimmlabs/AAV_GrimmLab_JoVE2022). It is the follow-up script of the _Barcode & Peptide Detection Script_ and can be used to analyse its output files. Just like the _Detection Script_, this _Analysis Script_ can be applied both for barcoded AAV screenings as well as for peptide display libraries. When running the script in barcode analysis mode, it performs three (or optionally five) normalization steps, creating an output file for each one. When running the script in peptide analysis mode, it translates the found DNA sequences of the peptides into amino acid sequences and ranks them by their frequency. This README will give you a detailed instruction on how to use the updated combined script, i.e., how your input files should look like, what arguments you need to specifiy, and what kind of output files will be generated. Especially if you do not feel so comfortable with running scripts, please read this instruction carefully! 

&emsp;

## Prepare your Input Files
### _For Barcode Analysis_
To successfully run this script, you first need to run the _Barcode and Peptide Detection Script_ on your sequencing data, including your input library. Then, you will need to prepare one input file containing a table with your filenames, animals, sample type, tissues, and vg/dg values. You can easily do this in Excel or a similar program and then save it as a CSV file. **The separator in the CSV file must be a ','.**
&emsp;

The input file MUST follow this structure:
&emsp;

| Filename                | SampleType| Animal     |Tissue        | vg/dg     |
|-------------------------|-----------|------------|--------------|-----------|
| Sample1_Variants.csv    | cDNA      | M1         | Heart        | 0.00635   |
| Sample2_Variants.csv    | gDNA      | M1         | Heart        | 0.00635   |
| Sample3_Variants.cs     | cDNA      | M1         | Kidney       | 0.000293  |
| Sample4_Variants.csv    | gDNA      | M1         | Kidney       | 0.000293  |
| Sample5_Variants.csv    | cDNA      | M2         | Lung         | 0.00871   |
| Sample6_Variants.csv    | gDNA      | M2         | Lung         | 0.00871   |

&emsp;

**IMPORTANT:** The names of the columns have to be written exactly how it is shown here! Do not use a '_' in your animal, sample type or tissue entries!  
If you have RQ values for your cDNA samples and you would like to use them for the normalization, then just write them in the vg/dg column into the rows corresponding to your cDNA samples. The calculation will then be done with the RQ.  
  
Other input files that you will need, but won't have to specially prepare:

  - A folder with **the _Variant.csv output files from the _Barcode and Peptide Detection Script_** containing the counts of the expected variants.  

  - **The _Variant.csv output file of your Input Library** from the _Barcode and Peptide Detection Script_. The values for the normalization to the input library will be directly calculated from this.  

**Note**: If any read count, vg/dg, or library normalization values equal zero, they will be replaced by a pseudocount of 1x10<sup>-6</sup>. A warning will be printed in the terminal. 

&emsp;

### _For Peptide Analysis_
To successfully run this script, you first need to run the _Barcode and Peptide Detection Script_ on your sequencing data. Then, you will need to prepare one input file containing a table with your filenames, animals, and tissues. You can easily do this in Excel or a similar program and then save it as a CSV file. **The separator in the CSV file has to be a ','.** 
&emsp;

The input file MUST follow this structure:
&emsp;

| Filename        | Animal     |Tissue        |       
|-----------------|------------|--------------|
| Sample1_PV.csv  | M1         | Heart        |
| Sample2_PV.csv  | M1         | Kidney       |
| Sample3_PV.csv  | M1         | Lung         |
| Sample4_PV.csv  | M2         | Kidney       |
| Sample5_PV.csv  | M2         | Lung         |
| Sample6_PV.csv  | M3         | Heart        |

&emsp;

**IMPORTANT:** The names of the columns have to be written exactly how it is shown here! Do not use a '_' in your animal or tissue entries!

Other input files that you will need, but won't have to specially prepare:
  - A folder with **the _PV.csv output files from the _Barcode and Peptide Detection Script_** containing the counts of the found peptides.

&emsp;

## Running the Script
If you are running the script for the first time, open the Windows Terminal and call the script with 
```
python Script_BarcodePeptideAnalysis.py -h
````

This will give you a list of the arguments that you need to specifiy for running the script successfully:  

&emsp;

**<p style="font-size:15px;">Required arguments:</p>**
- **-a MODE:**  
 Specify in which mode you want to run the script. If you want to use it for analysis of barcodes, type "BC", if you want to use it for analysis of peptide insertions, type "PV". 

- **-i INPUTFILE:**  
 Give the path to your input CSV file. For barcode analysis, this should contain the filenames, sample types, animals, tissues, and vg/dg or RQ values. For peptide analysis, it only includes the filenames, animals, and tissues.  

 - **-d DIRECTORY:**  
 Give the path to the directory containing the _Variants.csv  or _PV.csv output files from the _Detection Script_. 

&emsp;

 **<p style="font-size:15px;">Optional arguments:</p>**

- **-o OUTPUTDIR:**  
Give the path to the directory where the output files should be saved. If not specified, a new folder in the directory with the input data will be automatically created for the output files.

- **-w SILENCE:**  
Set this flag if you want to avoid printouts in the terminal.  

- **-z VERSION:**  
Set this flag if you want to show the script's version number and exit.

&emsp;

**<p style="font-size:15px;">Additional arguments for barcode analysis:</p>**

- **-l LIBRARYNORM:**  
 Give the path to the _Variants.csv output file of the input library from the _Detection Script_. This argument is required for barcode analysis.

- **-x EXTRANORM:**  
 Set this flag if you additionally want to compute the V<sub>αβ</sub> and T<sub>αβ</sub> values.

&emsp;

**<p style="font-size:15px;">Additional arguments for peptide analysis:</p>**

- **-t TOPNUMBER:**  
You can specify the number of peptide sequences shown in the output files. The default is set to 100, i.e., the output will be limited to the top 100 ranking peptide sequences.

&emsp;

### _Example for Barcode Analysis_  

Here is an example on how to run the script for barcode analysis:
```
python Script_BarcodePeptideAnalysis.py -a BC -i ./Input/Inputfile.csv -l ./Input/Data/Input_Library_Variants.csv -d ./Input/Data/ -x
```
In this example, the V<sub>αβ</sub> and T<sub>αβ</sub> values will be computed and the output files will be saved in an automatically generated folder 'BarcodeAnalysis_Results' that is saved in the directory with the input files.

&emsp;

### _Example for Peptide Analysis_

Here is an example on how to run the script for peptide analysis:
```
python Script_BarcodePeptideAnalysis.py -a PV -i ./Input/Inputfile.csv -d ./Input/Data/ -o ./Output/ -t 30 -w
```
In this example, the top 30 ranking peptide sequences will be shown in the output files which will be saved in the specified directory. Moreover, printouts in the terminal will be avoided.

&emsp;

## The Output Files
### _For Barcode Analysis_
Running the script in barcode analysis mode will generate at least 4 output CSV files.

- **Read Counts File:**  
This CSV file contains a table with the raw read counts of each variant in each tissue for each unique combination of animal and sample type. Additionally, it shows the vg/dg or RQ values as well as the input library normalization values. Each output file will follow this table structure.  
  
- **P<sub>αβ</sub>  File:**  
This CSV file contains the proportional read count values, or P<sub>αβ</sub> values. They are calculated by normalizing the read counts R of all variants α in tissue β to the sum of all variants α in β:

$$
\displaystyle
\ P_{αβ}= \frac{R_{αβ}}{\sum_{α} R_{αβ}}
$$  

- __P*<sub>αβ</sub> File:__  
This CSV file contains the proportional count values normalized to the input library, or P*<sub>αβ</sub> values. They are calculated by normalizing P<sub>αβ</sub> to the proportion of each variant α in the initial library L<sub>α</sub>, thus correcting for the uneven composition in library:

$$
\displaystyle
\ P{&ast;}_{αβ}= \frac{P_{αβ}}{L_{α}}
$$

- **B<sub>αβ</sub> File:**  
In this CSV file,  P*<sub>αβ</sub> is normalized to the qPCR-determined vg/dg or RQ, termed G<sub>β</sub>, to allow a comparison of one variant α over all analyzed tissues β:

$$
\displaystyle
\ B_{αβ}= \frac{P_{αβ}}{L_{α}}*G_β
$$

&emsp;

Optional:

- **V<sub>αβ</sub> File:**  
In this CSV file,  B<sub>αβ</sub> values are shown as proportions of the sum over all variants α of B<sub>αβ</sub>. These values can be useful to create bar plots which demonstrate the proportion of all variants α in one tissue β, exemplifying the efficiency of the individual vectors:  

$$
\displaystyle
\ V_{αβ}= \frac{B_{αβ}}{\sum_{α} B_{αβ}}
$$    

- **T<sub>αβ</sub> File:**  
In this CSV file,  B<sub>αβ</sub> values are shown as proportions of the sum over all tissues β of B<sub>αβ</sub>. These values can be useful to create bar plots which show the proportion of one variant α in all tissues β, allowing an analysis of the tissue specificity:

$$
\displaystyle
\ T_{αβ}= \frac{B_{αβ}}{\sum_{β} B_{αβ}}
$$  

&emsp;

### _For Peptide Analysis_
Running the script in peptide analysis mode will generate 2 output CSV files.

- **Ranking DNAseq File:**  
This CSV file contains a table with the DNA sequences of the ranked top 100 (or otherwise specified number) peptides for each animal and tissue combination, their raw counts, and proportions.  

- **Ranking PeptideSeq File:**  
This CSV file contains a table with the amino acid sequences of the ranked top 100 (or otherwise specified number) peptides for each animal and tissue combination, their raw counts, and proportions.


</div>
